Intro: talk about who I am, what the internship is and what the project is and how this file is structured, the way I want you to explain it is that this is the guide I wish I had while working on this project, as I will walk you though every step of the project so that you can build your version of the automatic guitar tuning stand or even better!.

Hardware and circuits:

here explain that there are 3 fundamental parts of the robot, the audio detection, the tuning pegs and the strumming arm, all contributing to the final result, now depending of what you're trying to build you will need different things.

1- if you only want a system that can detect pitch (either a single string or polyphonic pitch detection) the only thing you need is the audio detection circuit. I used the one amanda ghassaei detailed in her article
https://www.instructables.com/Arduino-Audio-Input/ with the audio input coming from a Korg CM200BK clip-on contact microphone as I wasn’t using an electric guitar (I got inspired to use that mic from Antonio Hinojosa Cabrera in his paper: https://upcommons.upc.edu/entities/publication/d1f17706-ed6d-4329-bab4-19746a667733 ). all the needed components are listed in amanda’s article with one very small change.

After I got circuit running I noticed there was a weird phenomenon, the signal gets picked up perfectly till it doesn’t. After weeks of work the solution was an extremely simple yet effective change given which was to add a 1 MΩ resistor to amanda’s circuit.

I link you back to the week 3 of my blog where I talk all about that: https://dtsf.sites.gettysburg.edu/dtsf2025/uncategorized/week-3-algorithmic-pivots-torque-troubles-and-a-breakthrough/

2- If you want an automatic strummer then you simply will the components shown in the strummer circuit and a NEMA 17 as strumming doesn’t require that much force. The rest of the parts and circuitry is detailed in this wonderful tutorial by Rachel De Barros https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wcLeXXATCR4

You will also need some form of way to keep the struming slider near the guitar, I personal dismantled an old 3d printer we had in the lab but anything would work, as long as you have something sliding at decent speed entering contact with the guitar strings. Also don’t forget the pick attachment, I 3d designed a pick attachment that worked for my particular use case so you can go ahead and use/ modify for your own terms

3- Now for the most important part, motors:

With motors you have two options, that is if you want to go with 1 string or multiple.

either go with the stepper motor that will work great for electric guitars and generally lower torque string instruments, or use a high torque DC motor for acoustic guitars.

Which exact stepper or DC motor you will need greatly depends on torque required by the heaviest string in the your instrument of study. The topic of torque required for guitar tuning is one that I believe is vey under-documented so I will speak about it in the research paper I am planning on publishing around the construction of this project. A good ballpark to keep in mind if you’re working with an acoustic guitar is 0.3 N·m required to move the heaviest string. The way we discovered that is quite entertaining and I encourage y’all to go check the blog about this research project here: https://dtsf.sites.gettysburg.edu/dtsf2025/taha

Now remember, static and dynamic torque aren’t the same, where in a stepper motor description it might show 0.4 N·m torque (the NEMA 17 I used) it still failed for strings that required only 0.3 N.m because the torque might have been enough to resist 0.4N.m while stationary, but while the stepper motor starts moving it’s torque capacity decreasing by around 50%. Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/static-torque

Just understand that DC and stepper motors aren’t better or worse than each other, they offer trade offs: DC motors smaller (relative to torque strength) are cheaper with greater availability of cheap gearboxes to increase torque but lack precision and are more difficult to control, where as stepper motors are easier to control as you have full control of the “steps” taken by the motor but tend to be more expensive and generally bigger (relative to torque).

If you’re going for a single string model then the size of the motor doesn’t really matter, so in that case I would advise a stepper motor as it is easier to control and implement. I have tried all of the NEMA motors up to the NEMA 17 ( no gear boxes, just typical ones founde in 3d printers) and none of them worked for the highest torque string in my acoustic guitar, I suspect the NEMA 23 would work greate as shown in this project: MECH 5840 - Applied Mechatronics at Auburn University. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DU2-K5PHwyM&t=147s. For the circuitry I would refer you back to the stepper circuit picture in the hardware folder and to the tutorial by Rachel De Barros linked above for stepper motors.

If however you want the full package ( what this project is about ) and you want to automatically strum the guitar, detect pitch for multiple strings and automatically tune all of them at the same time, then DC motors are the way to go.

The ones I chose were the Greartisan DC 12V 20RPM Gear Motor High Torque Electric Micro Speed Reduction Geared Motor Centric Output Shaft 37mm Diameter Gearbox on amazon

They are excellent in terms of torque and they fit exactly for the project we were working with, this is actually one of the biggest challenges in a multi string system, motor size is crucial and so anything above this 37mm diameter wouldn’t have worked on the guitar I was using.

You will also need a way to hold the motors together, I designed my own box design that you can see in the 3d folder called motor_box. And for the 3d peg attachment I used the DC_peg_attachement.

Software:

For the software, go through each code parcel and explain your reasoning behind it. Reference yourself back to the blog to look for reasons for the certain decisions but the majority of it will be based on the code itself and the comments left.

Future improvements:

I believe there is so many things that can be added to the project,

1- one could be a simple a accurate torque study, while doing my research on this topic it was incredibly hard to find good sources for the torque required to tune different instrument which is something crucial when it comes to automatic tuners, so a study that studies that for different string instruments would be amazing.

2- The obvious next improvement would be to add the second side to the project I built, for budget and time constraints I wasn’t able to build the full 6 strings set but It would be amazing to see the entire system in one polished project here’s what my vision initially was for the project:

“My goal is to design and build a standalone device that can automatically and precisely tune all six strings of a guitar. Imagine a stand you can place your guitar on, and with minimal interaction, the device will listen to each string and adjust the tuning pegs until the guitar is perfectly in tune according to a selected standard or custom tuning. The final product should be efficient, user-friendly, and a practical tool for musicians. To achieve this for all six strings, the physical design I’m envisioning for attaching the tuning mechanisms to the guitar headstock will function somewhat like an adjustable phone holder. It will feature a fixed module housing three tuning motors and a corresponding moving module with the other three motors, connected by a spring-loaded mechanism. The idea is to open the mechanism by pulling the moving part, align the first set of motors with their tuning pegs, and then release the moving part so the spring clamps the second set onto the remaining pegs, engaging all six.”

3- the current tuning system uses bursts for the tunning process but this can be streamlined dramatically by using some form of linear regression to figure out what the motor movement equate to in pitch change for every single string which would reduce to the tuning time to less than 3 seconds in my rough estimate.

4- Another greate add on could be to build a good user interface for the product and to be usable in a more consumer interface

5- building a good calibration protocole for those FFT variables would be a greate advancement as I had to spend countless hours tweaking those numbers so that the system works reliably

6- One current problem with the polyphonic system is that the binning model only works if the guitar was at some tuned to the right tuning system and then only got untuned naturally by a couple of Hz. it would be greate if there was a system where you initially can pluck every string individually to tune the guitar up to the appropriate bin ( this will require high precision automatic strummer) and then once it’s close enough turn on the normal tuning mode that can tune all of them at the same time, this coupled with a good interface can write the blue pring of the first comertialzable self tuning guitar stand.

Acknowledgements:

speak about how this random video of Tim Bell building his own automatic guitar tuner more than 14 years ago flicked a switch in me and I knew this was possible to make. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZahpROn3gm0

None of this would have been possible without the help of professor Eric Remy and Joshua Wagner and then yea just thank them and stuff

references:
